## Overview

This is a short reference of all of Orbit's (and Orbit apps) methods.

## Module `orbit`

**orbit.new([*app*])** - creates a new Orbit application, returning it (as a module).
If *app* is a string this is the application's name, and sets field _NAME. If *app*
is a table it is used instead of a fresh table. This means you can pass `orbit.new`
to the `module` function

**orbit.htmlify(*func*[, *func*...])** - modifies the environment of *func* to
include functions that generate HTML

## Orbit apps

**app.run(*wsapi_env*)** - WSAPI entry point for application, generated by Orbit

**app.real_path** - the root of the application in the filesystem, defaults to
the path inferred by WSAPI launchers (`wsapi.app_path`), but can be overriden

**app.mapper** - mapper used by `app:model`, defaults to an instance of `orbit.model`,
but can be overriden

**app.not_found** - default handler, sends a 404 response to the client, can be overriden.
The handler receives a `web` object

**app.server_error** - error handler, sends a 500 response with stack trace to the
client, can be overriden. The handler receives a `web` object

**app:dispatch_get(*func*, *patt*[, *patt*...])** - installs *func* as a GET handler for
the patterns *patt*. *func* receives a `web` object and the captures

**app:dispatch_post(*func*, *patt*[, *patt*...])** - installs *func* as a POST handler for
the patterns *patt*. *func* receives a `web` object and the captures

**app:dispatch_wsapi(*func*, *patt*[, *patt*...])** - installs *func* as a WSAPI handler for
the patterns *patt*. *func* receives the unmodified WSAPI environment

**app:dispatch_static(*patt*[, *patt*...])** - installs a static files handler for
the patterns *patt*. This handler assumes the PATH_INFO is a file relative to
`app.real_path` and sends it to the client. The MIME type is detected from
the extension (default application/octec-stream)

**app:serve_static(*web*, *filename*)** - returns the content of file *filename* (which can be
anywher in the filesystem), while setting the appropriate headers with the file's MIME
type

**app:htmlify(*patt*[, *patt*...])** - same as `orbit.htmlify`, but changes all of the
app's module functions that match the patterns *patt*

**app:model(...)** - calls `app.mapper:new(...)`, so the behavior depends on the mapper
you are using

## `web` methods

The *web* objects inherit the functions of module `wsapi.util` as methods.

## Util

**wsapi.util.url_encode(*s*)** - encodes *s* according to RFC2396

**wsapi.util.url_decode(*s*)** - decodes *s* according to RFC2396

